Docs overhaul (#431)
cmu-delphi/epipredict: vignettes/epipredict.Rmd

wanted to increase the number of quantiles fit:

```{r make-quantile-levels-forecasts, warning=FALSE}
two_week_ahead <- arx_forecaster(
  covid_case_death_rates |>
    filter(time_value <= forecast_date, geo_value %in% used_locations),
  outcome = "death_rate",
  trainer = quantile_reg(),
  predictors = c("death_rate"),
  args_list = arx_args_list(
    lags = list(c(0, 7, 14)),
    ahead = 14,
    ############ changing quantile_levels ############
    quantile_levels = c(0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 0.95)
    ##################################################
  )
)
hardhat::extract_fit_engine(two_week_ahead$epi_workflow)
```

See the function documentation of `arx_args_list()` for more examples of the modifications available.
If you are looking for even further modifications, you will want a custom
workflow, for which you should see the [guts
vignette](preprocessing-and-models).

## Generating multiple aheads
Frequently, one doesn't want just a forecast for a single day, but a trajectory
of forecasts for several weeks.
The way to do this using `arx_forecaster()` is by looping over aheads; for
example, to predict every day over 4 weeks:

```{r temp-thing}

> all_canned_results <- lapply(

Reviewer: suggestion: it's a little odd to have to loop over aheads "manually". Seems like we could easily modify `arx_forecaster` to map over a list of aheads if length > 1. Same with autoplot.

Author: Fair point for `arx_forecaster`. @dajmcdon thoughts on adding a loop to `arx_forecaster`?

I believe autoplot already does this

Author: The type stability on its own seems like a good argument for the current version. The extra overhead of the user doing a map isn't that great, and we're demoing how to do it here.

    filter(geo_value %in% used_locations, time_value < forecast_date),
  outcome = "death_rate",
  predictors = c("death_rate", "case_rate"),
  trainer = multinom_reg(),
  args_list = arx_class_args_list(
    lags = list(c(0, 1, 2, 3, 7, 14), c(0, 7, 14)),
    ahead = 2 * 7,
    breaks = c(-0.01, 0.01, 0.1)
  )
)
classifier$predictions
```

The prediction splits into 4 cases: `(-∞, -0.01)`, `(-0.01, 0.01)`,  `(0.01,
0.1)`, and `(0.1, ∞)`.
In this case, the classifier put all 4 of the states in the same category,
`(0.01, 0.1)`. **TODO** _effected by the old data._
The number and size of the categories is controlled by `breaks`, which gives the
boundary values.

For comparison, the growth rates for the `target_date`, as computed using
`{epiprocess}`:

```{r growth_rate_results}
growth_rates <- covid_case_death_rates |>
  filter(geo_value %in% used_locations) |>
  group_by(geo_value) |>
  mutate(
    deaths_gr = growth_rate(x = time_value, y = death_rate)
  ) |>
  ungroup()
growth_rates |> filter(time_value == "2021-08-14")
```

Unfortunately, this forecast was not particularly accurate, since for example
`-1.39` is not remotely in the interval `(-0.01, 0.01]`.

> ## Fitting multi-key panel data

Author: That is unfortunate. I suspect trying to go all the way to a "publication-ready" plot via autoplot is probably more than we can reasonably handle. [This package](https://www.sthda.com/english/wiki/ggfortify-extension-to-ggplot2-to-handle-some-popular-packages-r-software-and-data-visualization) has some examples of text that is also oversized. I suspect dealing with that requires case by case reasoning, which is best addressed by the user doing a `+ theme(...)` to deal with their case. Perhaps demoing that is worthwhile in this case

E.g. [someone asking about auto-adjusting text size](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/46296994/automatically-adjust-plot-title-width-using-ggplot)

[For wrapping](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2631780/set-the-plot-title-to-wrap-around-and-shrink-the-text-to-fit-the-plot) it seems there's no great way to go about it besides guess and check.

Choosing a theme where the titles can bleed over the edge like in the first link is probably a functional if ugly solution.

---
title: "Get started with `epipredict`"
output: rmarkdown::html_vignette
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Get started with `epipredict`}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
---

# Introduction

```{r, include = FALSE}
source(here::here("vignettes/_common.R"))
```

```{r setup, message=FALSE, include = FALSE}
library(dplyr)
library(parsnip)
library(workflows)
library(recipes)
library(epidatasets)
library(epipredict)
library(epiprocess)
library(ggplot2)
library(purrr)
forecast_date <- as.Date("2021-08-01")

> used_locations <- c("ca", "ma", "ny", "tx")

Reviewer 2: Consider making these visible in the code, so the vignette code can be reproduced by someone following along.

Author: Moved down a bit and done

    `step`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/index.html)
  * _Trainer_: train a model on data, resulting in a fitted model object.
    Examples include linear regression, quantile regression, or [any `{parsnip}`
    engine](https://www.tidymodels.org/find/parsnip/).
  * _Postprocessor_: unique to `{epipredict}`; used to transform the
    predictions after the model has been fit, such as
    - generating quantiles from purely point-prediction models,
    - reverting operations done in the `step`s, such as converting from
    rates back to counts
    - generally adapting the format of the prediction to its eventual use.

The rest of this "Get Started" vignette will focus on using and modifying the canned forecasters.
Check out the [Custom Epiworkflows vignette](preprocessing-and-models) for examples of using the forecaster
framework to make more complex, custom forecasters.

If you are interested in time series in a non-panel data context, you may also
want to look at `{timetk}` and `{modeltime}` for some related techniques.

For a more in-depth treatment with some practical applications, see also the
[Forecasting Book](https://cmu-delphi.github.io/delphi-tooling-book/).

> # Panel forecasting basics

Reviewer 3: I'm against empty sections. Maybe add a sentence or two saying what's to come?

time series, `case_rate` and `death_rate`.
The keys are represented in "long" format, with separate columns for the key and
the value, while separate time series are represented in "wide" format with each
time series stored in a separate column.

`{epiprocess}` is designed to handle data that always has a geographic key, and
potentially other key values, such as age, ethnicity, or other demographic
information.
For example, `grad_employ_subset` from `{epidatasets}` also has both `age_group`
and `edu_qual` as additional keys:

```{r extra_keys}
grad_employ_subset
```

See `{epiprocess}` for [more details on the `epi_df` format](https://cmu-delphi.github.io/epiprocess/articles/epi_df.html).

Panel time series are ubiquitous in epidemiology, but are also common in
economics, psychology, sociology, and many other areas.
While this package was designed with epidemiology in mind, many of the
techniques are more broadly applicable.

## Customizing `arx_forecaster()`
Let's expand on the basic example presented on the [landing
page](../index.html#motivating-example), starting with adjusting some parameters in
`arx_forecaster()`.

> The `trainer` argument allows us to set the fitting engine. We can use either one of the

Reviewer 3: I don't like "fitting". Here, I would say either "computational" or "estimation"
(neither is quite correct).

> included engines, such as `quantile_reg()`, or one of the relevant [parsnip

Author: got it, I'll change this reference to one of the other internals, but leave it on the reference page

If you want to make further modifications, you will need a custom
workflow; see the [Custom Epiworkflows vignette](custom_epiworkflows) for details.

## Generating multiple aheads
We often want to generate a a trajectory
of forecasts over a range of dates, rather than for a single day.
We can do this with `arx_forecaster()` by looping over aheads.
For example, to predict every day over a 4-week time period:

```{r aheads-loop}
all_canned_results <- lapply(
  seq(0, 28),
  \(days_ahead) {
    arx_forecaster(
      covid_case_death_rates |>
        filter(time_value <= forecast_date, geo_value %in% used_locations),
      outcome = "death_rate",
      predictors = c("case_rate", "death_rate"),
      trainer = quantile_reg(),
      args_list = arx_args_list(
        lags = list(c(0, 1, 2, 3, 7, 14), c(0, 7, 14)),
        ahead = days_ahead
      )
    )
  }
)
# pull out the workflow and the predictions to be able to
#  effectively use autoplot
workflow <- all_canned_results[[1]]$epi_workflow
results <- purrr::map_df(all_canned_results, ~ `$`(., "predictions"))
autoplot(
  object = workflow,
  predictions = results,

>   plot_data = covid_case_death_rates |>

Reviewer 3: It's in the served site at: https://67f5a1065c980a95c56b327c--epipredict.netlify.app/

Maybe `observed_response`?

>   plot_data = covid_case_death_rates |>

Author: Strange, the `.max_facet` is definitely set to deprecated. I guess I didn't pass them through to the sub-calls to autoplot, which might be causing it.

```{r make-cdc-forecast, warning=FALSE}
all_cdc_flatline <-
  cdc_baseline_forecaster(
    covid_case_death_rates |>
      filter(time_value <= forecast_date, geo_value %in% used_locations),
    outcome = "death_rate",
    args_list = cdc_baseline_args_list(
      aheads = 1:28,
      data_frequency = "1 day"
    )
  )
# same plotting code as in the arx multi-ahead case
workflow <- all_cdc_flatline$epi_workflow
results <- all_cdc_flatline$predictions
autoplot(
  object = workflow,
  predictions = results,
  plot_data = covid_case_death_rates |> filter(geo_value %in% used_locations, time_value > "2021-07-01")
)
```

`cdc_baseline_forecaster()` and `flatline_forecaster()` generate medians in the same way, 
but `cdc_baseline_forecaster()`'s quantiles are generated using
`layer_cdc_flatline_quantiles()` instead of `layer_residual_quantiles()`.
Both quantile-generating methods use the residuals to compute quantiles, but 
`layer_cdc_flatline_quantiles()` extrapolates the quantiles by repeatedly 
sampling the initial quantiles to generate the next set.
This results in much smoother quantiles, but ones that only capture the

> one-ahead uncertainty.

Reviewer 3: It calculates residuals from 1-ahead. Then sums these as it propagates
forward. So if ahead is `a`, and `F` is the empirical distribution of the 1-ahead
residuals, then the uncertainty for ahead `a` is modeled as the `a`-fold
convolution of `F`. This contrasts with modeling `a`-ahead uncertainty as the
empirical distribution of the residuals of an `a`-ahead predictor.

> This results in much smoother quantiles, but ones that only capture the
> one-ahead uncertainty.

Author: Right, ok, we're saying the same thing then. I suppose "capture the one-ahead uncertainty" could be taken to mean use literally the same quantiles rather than propagating it to further aheads.

```suggestion
This results in much smoother quantiles, but ones that propagate the one-ahead
empirical quantiles, rather than directly use k-ahead empirical quantiles.
```

The `climatological_forecaster()` is a different kind of baseline. It produces a
point forecast and quantiles based on the historical values for a given time of
year, rather than extrapolating from recent values.
For example, on the same dataset as above:
```{r make-climatological-forecast, warning=FALSE}
all_climate <- climatological_forecaster(
  covid_case_death_rates_extended |>
    filter(time_value <= forecast_date, geo_value %in% used_locations),
  outcome = "death_rate",
  args_list = climate_args_list(
    forecast_horizon = seq(0, 28),
    window_size = 14,
    time_type = "day",
    forecast_date = forecast_date
  )
)
workflow <- all_climate$epi_workflow
results <- all_climate$predictions
autoplot(
  object = workflow,
  predictions = results,
  plot_data = covid_case_death_rates_extended |> filter(geo_value %in% used_locations, time_value > "2021-07-01")
)
```

Note that to have enough training data for this method, we're using 
`covid_case_death_rates_extended`, which starts in March 2020, rather than
`covid_case_death_rates`, which starts in December.
Without at least a year's worth of historical data, it is impossible to do a
climatological model.

> Even with one year of data, as we have here, the resulting forecasts are unreliable.

Author: That would definitely be preferable. We would have to add it to `epidatasets` or pull the data; all but 2 are covid, and the others are census data and canadian employment data.

> Even with one year of data, as we have here, the resulting forecasts are unreliable.

Author: I've updating this to use `fluview` ([most recent preview](https://68152e45625710260c913094--epipredict.netlify.app/articles/epipredict#climatological_forecaster) for that section); should I also make a PR to include this in epidatasets, or are we ok with including the API request here?

One feature of the climatological baseline is that it forecasts multiple aheads
simultaneously.
This is possible for `arx_forecaster()`, but only using `trainer =
smooth_quantile_reg()`, which is built to handle multiple aheads simultaneously.

### `arx_classifier()`

Unlike the other canned forecasters, `arx_classifier` predicts binned growth rate.
The forecaster converts the raw outcome variable into a growth rate, which it then bins and predicts, using bin thresholds provided by the user.
For example, on the same dataset and `forecast_date` as above, this model outputs:

```{r discrete-rt}
classifier <- arx_classifier(
  covid_case_death_rates |>
    filter(geo_value %in% used_locations, time_value < forecast_date),
  outcome = "death_rate",
  predictors = c("death_rate", "case_rate"),
  trainer = multinom_reg(),
  args_list = arx_class_args_list(
    lags = list(c(0, 1, 2, 3, 7, 14), c(0, 7, 14)),
    ahead = 2 * 7,
    breaks = c(-0.01, 0.01, 0.1)
  )
)
classifier$predictions
```

> The number and size of the growth rate categories is controlled by `breaks`, which define the

Author: You're talking about the `breaks = 0.25 / 7` rather than `0.5` or `0.25`, right? Seems a bit odd to bin all negative growth rates with a subset of the positive ones, but since it's just a demo for a classifier at all that's not too big a deal.

bin boundaries.

In this example, the custom `breaks` passed to `arx_class_args_list()` correspond to 4 bins:
`(-∞, -0.01)`, `(-0.01, 0.01)`,  `(0.01, 0.1)`, and `(0.1, ∞)`.
The bins can be interpreted as: the outcome variable is decreasing, approximately stable, slightly increasing, or increasing quickly.

The returned `predictions` assigns each state to one of the growth rate bins.
In this case, the classifier expects the growth rate for all 4 of the states to fall into the same category,
`(-0.01, 0.01]`.

To see how this model performed, let's compare to the actual growth rates for the `target_date`, as computed using
`{epiprocess}`:

```{r growth_rate_results}
growth_rates <- covid_case_death_rates |>
  filter(geo_value %in% used_locations) |>
  group_by(geo_value) |>
  mutate(
    deaths_gr = growth_rate(x = time_value, y = death_rate)
  ) |>
  ungroup()
growth_rates |> filter(time_value == "2021-08-14")
```

Unfortunately, this forecast was not particularly accurate. All real growth rates were larger than the predicted growth rates, with California (real growth rate `-1.39`) not remotely in the interval (`(-0.01, 0.01]`).

> 

Reviewer 3: Again, I don't like "fitting". How about "Handling multi-key..."

## Fitting multi-key panel data

If multiple keys are set in the `epi_df` as `other_keys`,
`arx_forecaster` will automatically group by those in addition to the required geographic key.
For example, predicting the number of graduates in each of the categories in `grad_employ_subset` from above:

```{r multi_key_forecast, warning=FALSE}
# only fitting a subset, otherwise there are ~550 distinct pairs, which is bad for plotting
edu_quals <- c("Undergraduate degree", "Professional degree")
geo_values <- c("Quebec", "British Columbia")

grad_employ <- grad_employ_subset |>
    filter(time_value < 2017) |>
    filter(edu_qual %in% edu_quals, geo_value %in% geo_values)

grad_employ

grad_forecast <- arx_forecaster(
  grad_employ |>
    filter(time_value < 2017),
  outcome = "num_graduates",
  predictors = c("num_graduates"),
  args_list = arx_args_list(
    lags = list(c(0, 1, 2)),
    ahead = 1
  )
)
# and plotting
autoplot(
  grad_forecast$epi_workflow,
  grad_forecast$predictions,
  grad_employ,
)
```

> The 8 graphs represent all combinations of the `geo_values` (`"Quebec"` and `"British Columbia"`), `edu_quals` (`"Undergraduate degree"` and `"Professional degree"`), and age brackets (`"15 to 34 years"` and `"35 to 64 years"`).

Author: Not sure what happened here, they're correct in the rebuild though: https://68152e45625710260c913094--epipredict.netlify.app/articles/epipredict#fitting-multi-key-panel-data
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b55dce6d-fffd-4a67-bb1e-b42d29d69d02)

I also added the forecasting date vertical line and the `observed_response` while I was looking at it again.

> ## Fitting a non-geo-pooled model

Reviewer 3: Here, "Estimating models without geo-pooling" (technically, there is one model
per geo, so multiple models, unless you think of a larger model class that
encapsulates this flexibility)

The methods shown so far fit a single model across all geographic regions.
This is called "geo-pooling". 

> To fit a non-geo-pooled model that fits each geography separately, one either needs a multi-level

Reviewer 3: This isn't quite correct. There are many types of "non-pooled" models that one
could use that aren't accessible with arx_forecaster (random effects models for
instance) but can be accommodated by our framework or in tidymodels. Estimating
50 geo specific models is what you're doing here, and that does require looping.
I'd prefer that you say "estimate a model" rather than "fit a model".

Author: Isn't random effects an example of a kind of multi-level model? Interestingly, apparently they are actually working on engines for this sort of thing, which I guess I had missed when I wrote this https://multilevelmod.tidymodels.org/index.html

Author: I suppose there's also vector AR as a way of doing this. In the interest of not going on tangents I'll rewrite it to not talk about the more complicated alternatives.

Reviewer 3: Yes, but multi-level models don't fit each geo separately. So "to fit ... each geography separately, one ... needs a multi-level" isn't accurate. To fit separately, you just map over geos, as you do later. A multi-level model is an example of something between pooled and separate. And there are many possible versions. And many other options that aren't multi-level models (a VAR would be an example of non-pooled, non-multilevel).

geo_values <- covid_case_death_rates |>
  pull(geo_value) |>
  unique()

all_fits <-
  purrr::map(geo_values, \(geo) {
    covid_case_death_rates |>
      filter(
        geo_value == geo,
        time_value <= forecast_date
      ) |>
      arx_forecaster(
        outcome = "death_rate",
        trainer = linear_reg(),
        predictors = c("death_rate"),
        args_list = arx_args_list(
          lags = list(c(0, 7, 14)),
          ahead = 14
        )
      )
  })
map_df(all_fits, ~ pluck(., "predictions"))
```

Fitting separate models for each geography is both 56 times slower[^7] than geo-pooling, and fits each model on far less data.
If a dataset contains relatively few observations for each geography, fitting a geo-pooled model is likely to produce better, more stable results.
However, geo-pooling can only be used if values are comparable in meaning and scale across geographies or can be made comparable, for example by normalization.

If we wanted to build a geo-aware model, such as a linear regression with a different intercept for each geography, we would need to build a [custom workflow](custom_epiworkflows) with geography as a factor.

> # Anatomy of a canned forecaster

Reviewer 3: I'm against empty sections. Maybe add a sentence or two setting up the discussion?

## Code object
Let's dissect the forecaster we trained back on the [landing
page](../index.html#motivating-example):

```{r make-four-forecasts, warning=FALSE}
four_week_ahead <- arx_forecaster(
  covid_case_death_rates |> filter(time_value <= forecast_date),
  outcome = "death_rate",
  predictors = c("case_rate", "death_rate"),
  args_list = arx_args_list(
    lags = list(c(0, 1, 2, 3, 7, 14), c(0, 7, 14)),
    ahead = 4 * 7,
    quantile_levels = c(0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 0.9)
  )
)
```

> `four_week_ahead` has two components: an `epi_workflow`, and a table of

Reviewer 3: Actually 3 (there's `$metadata`)

`predictions`.
The table of predictions is a simple tibble,

```{r show_predictions}
four_week_ahead$predictions
```

where `.pred` gives the point/median prediction, and `.pred_distn` is a

> `dist_quantiles()` object representing a distribution through various quantile

Reviewer 3: It no longer has this class: it is `quantile_pred`. The rest of this paragraph
is similarly out of date.

levels.
The `[6]` in the name refers to the number of quantiles that have been
explicitly created[^4].
By default, `.pred_distn` covers a 90% prediction interval, reporting the 5% and 95% quantiles.

The `epi_workflow` is a significantly more complicated object, extending a
`workflows::workflow()`  to include post-processing steps:

```{r show_workflow}
four_week_ahead$epi_workflow
```

An `epi_workflow()` consists of 3 parts:

- `Preprocessor`: a collection of steps that transform the data to be ready for
      modelling. Steps can be custom, as are those included in this package, 
      or [be defined in `{recipes}`](https://recipes.tidymodels.org/reference/index.html).
      `four_week_ahead` has 5 steps; you can inspect them more closely by
      running `hardhat::extract_recipe(four_week_ahead$epi_workflow)`.[^6]

> - `Model`: the actual model that does the fitting, given by a

Reviewer 3: Here "Model" is used to simultaneously mean many different things. And not
something easily changed. When I say "model" I mean a statistical model. It
doesn't do fitting. One can estimate a model with data. `parsnip::linear_reg()`
is a "model" though it also accommodates constraints or priors on the model
space, which a
statistician may or may not consider to be a different model from the
unconstrained linear model. `lm()` is a computational engine that estimates the
linear model via OLS (which happens to coincide with maximum likelihood in the
case that the errors are assumed to be mean zero normal). `glm()` could be used
instead, though the computation is performed differently.

In any case "the actual model that does the fitting" is not a good way of
describing this result. It's more like "the estimates produced for the linear
regression model as computed with `lm()`"

Author: It is an unfortunate name collision. Hopefully the new wording is clearer (leaving the discussion of fit specifically for above).

Reviewer 3: >  fit those parameters to the training data as prepared by

I would say "estimate those parameters using the training data..."

  `parsnip::model_spec`. `four_week_ahead` uses the default of
  `parsnip::linear_reg()`, which is a `{parsnip}` wrapper for

>   `stats::lm()`. You can inspect the model more closely by running

Reviewer 3: it only wraps `lm()` because `engine = "lm"` by default. There are many other
engines that also estimate linear models.

  `hardhat::extract_fit_recipe(four_week_ahead$epi_workflow)`.
- `Postprocessor`: a collection of layers to be applied to the resulting
  forecast. Layers are internal to this package. `four_week_ahead` just so happens to have
  5 of as these well. You can inspect the layers more closely by running
  `epipredict::extract_layers(four_week_ahead$epi_workflow)`.

See the [Custom Epiworkflows vignette](custom_epiworkflows) for recreating and then
extending `four_week_ahead` using the custom forecaster framework.

## Mathematical description

Let's look at the mathematical details of the model in more detail, using a minimal version of
`four_week_ahead`:

```{r, four_week_again}
four_week_small <- arx_forecaster(
  covid_case_death_rates |> filter(time_value <= forecast_date),
  outcome = "death_rate",
  predictors = c("case_rate", "death_rate"),
  args_list = arx_args_list(
    lags = list(c(0, 7, 14), c(0, 7, 14)),
    ahead = 4 * 7,
    quantile_levels = c(0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 0.9)
  )
)
hardhat::extract_fit_engine(four_week_small$epi_workflow)
```

If $d_t$ is the death rate on day $t$ and $c_t$ is the case rate, then the model
we're fitting is:

> $$

Reviewer 3: I don't like this expression. I would prefer either $E[d_{t+28} | d_t,...,d_{t-14}, c_t,
..., c_{t-14}]$ or as you have it with the addition of mean-0 noise
$\epsilon_t$. It probably also needs a $j$ subscript for geography.

Author: how's the rewrite? I went with the 2nd and added $j$ subscripts. Also a line break, since the $j$'s cause it to get a bit longer.

d_{t+28} = a_0 + a_1 d_t + a_2 d_{t-7} + a_3 d_{t-14} + a_4 c_t + a_5 c_{t-7} + a_6 c_{t-14}.
$$

> For example, $a_1$ is `lag_0_death_rate` above, with a value of `r hardhat::extract_fit_engine(four_week_small$epi_workflow)$coefficients["lag_0_death_rate"] `,

Reviewer 3: Should round these.

while $a_5$ is `r hardhat::extract_fit_engine(four_week_small$epi_workflow)$coefficients["lag_7_case_rate"] `.

> The training data for fitting this linear model is constructed within the `arx_forecaster()` function by shifting a series

Reviewer 3: rather than "fitting", you should say "estimating the parameters of".

Reading it here made me search out other instances above. Possibly worth a
discussion elsewhere.

Author: I'm trying to have the language mirror the actual function used

---

> title: "Get started with `{epipredict}`"

Author: So this breaks the formatting in the title, and makes it literally those characters.

Reviewer: Ah, thanks for pointing out.
